write down about the ancienct janapdas in bengal:

the historic term janapads means the settelment of human beings. the sources of ancienct bengal suggest that in the earliest period bengal was divided among various tribes or kingdoms which were known as the janapads. 

The names of this janapads were purely descriptive and had no ethnic connection . These janapads are inhabited by non arian people. The hindu sources like the mahabharata and other bhedic literatures are the primary sources  about these human settelments. the ancienct janapads are as follow 

1. the banga: it is an ancienct human settelment situated in eastern bengal. but its geographical connotation in diffirant periods of history. the hindu literatures indicate that the banga is sea-backed nation and its realon extended for long time. they also mentioned that this is an area where finest quality of soft cotton febrics were produced. there was a coastal area approchable from the sea in the territory of banga. from the above mentioned referances, Banga appears to be an area of south and south eastern part of present bangladesh. 

2. the pundra and pundranagar: this is the earlies urban center of bangladesh which goes back to the 4 century bc. the ruins of this city have been identified at mahastangar in bagura district. it continued to be the headquarters of the administration of moryas, guptas, and palas. It was the capital of pundrabardhan-bhukti under the gupta rule. the famous chinese visitor hiuen tsang visited this place in the seventh century AD , pundra was situated from the western bank of karatoya. it was well connected  with all other parts of bengal throw land and river routes . for this connection, it was an important center of trade and commerce into the . the pundra continued its importance after the hindu regien and in the early muslim period. 

3. the gauda: As an ancient human settlement, Gauda is the important Janopad of Bengal. The archeaological evidence suggests that ancient Gauda located at coastal region. The famous & the first independent ruler of Gauda  is Shashanka. He ruled Gauda at the 7th century AD and his capital was the Karnasuborna which is located at present Murshidabad district. The Janapad of Gauda lay to the west of Bhagirathi and that its core area was Murshidabad.
In the 13th century, under the Sultans of bengal, Gauda denoted the entire area of the Muslim sultanate. Its capital also called Gaur or Lakhnaboti, located at present Chapai Nawabgonj district.

The Radha (ra-ro)
Radha is the ancient human settlement of Bengal. It is difficult to locate exactly its geographical position. But historical sources suggest that Radha is the west-southern part of ancient Bengal.
Howrah, Hughli and Burdwan in West Bengal are some areas of ancient Radha.


The Somotate
Samatate is an ancient territorial unit in ancient Bengal.  Chinese traveler Hiuen-tsang visited Samatat at 7th century AD. As per his account, it was the South-eastern part of Bengal and was a Buddhist cultural centre. The archaeological discoveries in the Lalmai-Mainamati area, it can now be stated with certainty that Samatata was formed at  Comilla-Noakhali areas and the adjacent parts of hilly Tripura.

The Harikel
Harikel is another geographical entity in ancient Bengal. But it is so difficult to locate it. Most of the evidence support that Harikel is the similar with our present Sylhet region. Another archeological evidence suggests its location at present Chittagong district. Harikel was situated by the side of Samatat.